# Verse Language Overview


Verse is a *functional logic* programming language designed by Tim Sweeney. Verse's philosophy can be summed up with three slogans: *it's just code*, *just one language*, and *Metaverse first.*

- *It's just code*. Gameplay assets, databases, networks, and other complex concepts are expressed in Verse as if they were just primitive Verse constructs. For example, in Verse, a global variable has all the power of a global database, and if you used that to retrieve a reference to an object that represents resources on a computer on the globe, then you have just effectively opened a network connection to that computer, all without calling a single API.

- *Just one language.* Verse uses the same program constructs to describe both what gets checked at compile-time and what runs at run-time. For example, defining the value of a local variable uses the same construct, and works for the same reason, as defining a new class. Verse gets *checked* before it runs, and checking accomplishes everything you'd expect from a type checker *and much more*, because checking simply runs your Verse code, but under *abstract execution* rules that are under your control from within Verse. This allows you to do things that usually require dependent types and theorem proving, but using a much simpler system that is more directly programmer-controlled. Verse is *just one language* in one more sense: rather than just giving you one programming paradigm, it gives you three at once: functional programming (lambdas and a rich set of immutable data structures), imperative programming (mutable variables and pointers), and logic programming (programs that describe an equation to solve).

- *Metaverse first.* Verse's programming model is designed to be an ideal fit for the metaverse of our dreams: a single global simulation where user-written code is given the illusion of running on a single global sequential but super-fast computer. We believe we can reveal bits of this programming model even today in the world of Islands, so there is no point in delaying implementing this way of thinking. More importantly, Verse is meant to still be relevant decades or even centuries from now, so we have avoided designing any of Verse's features around today's limitations.

Verse's ability to have just one language for checking and execution falls out of Verse's reliance on functional logic, and in particular, leniency. Verse isn't a language just for imperatively telling the computer to do one step after another, but rather, it's a language for expressing logical constraints that can be evaluated in any order while always achieving the same outcome. Sometimes, this means that the Verse runtime will seem to "solve your program backwards". This captures something that already happens in other languages \- for example, in most object-oriented languages, it's not necessary to declare a class before its first use in a file, since the compiler scans the file looking for all classes before compiling uses of those classes. Verse generalizes this. All code in Verse executes when it can, which means executing out of order in some cases.

Let's get to know Verse with some examples.